{{About|the television show|the film
adaptation|The Flintstones (film)}} {{Use mdy
dates|date=August 2010}} {{Infobox television |
show_name            = The Flintstones | image
= [[Image:The Flintstones.jpg|250px]] | genre
= [[Sitcom]] | format               = Animated
series | creator              = [[William
Hanna]]<br/>[[Joseph Barbera]] | developer
= | writer               = | director
= William Hanna<br/>Joseph Barbera |
creative_director    = | presenter            = |
starring             = | judges               = |
voices               = [[Alan Reed]]<br>[[Jean
Vander Pyl]]<br>[[Mel Blanc]]<br>[[Bea
Benaderet]]<br>[[Gerry Johnson]]<br />[[Don
Messick]]<br>[[John Stephenson (actor)|John
Stephenson]] | narrated             = |
theme_music_composer = [[Hoyt Curtin]]<ref>{{cite
news|title= Reel Life/Film & Video File: Music
Helped 'Flintstones' on Way to Fame: In 1960, Hoyt
Curtin created the lively theme for the Stone Age
family. The show's producers say it may be the
most frequently broadcast song on TV |work= The
Los Angeles Times|date= 1994-06-02 |url=
http://articles.latimes.com/1994-06-02/news/vl-64779_1_hoyt-curtin|accessdate=2010-11-10|first=Pancho|last=Doll}}</ref>
| opentheme            = | endtheme             =
| composer             = | country              =
United States | language             = English |
num_seasons          = 6 | num_episodes         =
166 | list_episodes        = List of The
Flintstones episodes | executive_producer   = |
producer             = [[William
Hanna]]<br>[[Joseph Barbera]] | editor
= | cinematography       = | camera
= | runtime              = Various | company
= [[Hanna–Barbera Productions]] | distributor
= [[Screen Gems]] (original)<br>[[Warner Bros.
Television Distribution]] (current) | channel
= [[American Broadcasting Company|ABC]]
(1960-1966)<ref>{{cite news|title= Top 100
animated series|work= IGN|date=|url=
http://uk.tv.ign.com/top-100-animated-tv-series/9.html|accessdate=2010-10-19}}</ref>
| picture_format       = [[SDTV]] | audio_format
= | first_aired          = September 30, 1960 |
last_aired           = April 1, 1966   |
preceded_by          = | followed_by          =
''[[The Pebbles and Bamm-Bamm Show]]'' | related
= | website              =  | website_title
=  | production_website   = }}

'''''The Flintstones''''' is an animated,
prime-time American television [[sitcom]] that was
broadcast from September 30, 1960 to April 1, 1966
on [[American Broadcasting Company|ABC]].  The
show was produced by [[Hanna-Barbera
Productions]].  ''The Flintstones'' was about a
[[working-class]] [[Stone Age]] man's life with
his family and his next-door neighbor and best
friend.

The show's continuing popularity rested heavily on
its juxtaposition of modern everyday concerns in
the [[Stone Age]] setting.<ref>CD liner notes:
Saturday Mornings: Cartoons’ Greatest Hits, 1995
MCA Records</ref><ref>{{cite news|title=
Flintstones, The - Season 1 Review|url=
http://www.tvshowsondvd.com/reviews/Flintstones-Season-1/3383|work=
[[TVShowsOnDVD.com]]|date=|url=
http://www.tvshowsondvd.com/news/Site-News-BCI-Shut-Down/11064|accessdate=2010-08-25}}</ref>

==Overview==

The show is set in the [[Stone Age]] town of
[[Bedrock (The Flintstones)|Bedrock]]. (In some of
the earlier episodes, it was also referred to as
"Rockville".) In this [[fantasy]] version of the
past, [[dinosaurs]], [[saber-toothed tiger]]s,
[[Mammoth|woolly mammoths]], and other
long-extinct animals co-exist with cavemen.  Like
their mid-20th century peers, these cavemen listen
to records, live in split-level homes, and eat out
at restaurants, yet their technology is made
entirely from pre-industrial materials and largely
powered through the use of various animals. For
example, the cars are made out of stone, wood, and
animal skins, and powered by the passengers' feet
(as in the theme song, "Through the courtesy of
fred's two feet").

The original pilot episode clip was called the
"Flagstones" (which first appeared in 1959 as a
90-second promotion to draw advertisers to the
show) and was later reincorporated into the show's
first episode (third episode in original air date
order). The show's name was changed to "The
Flintstones" shortly thereafter.

===Technology=== Often the "prehistoric" analogue
to a modern machine uses an animal.<ref>{{cite
news|title= The Flintstones' 50th anniversary: 10
wackiest Bedrock inventions|work= Daily Telegraph
|date=September 30, 2010|url=
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/8034759/The-Flintstones-50th-anniversary-10-wackiest-Bedrock-inventions.html|accessdate=2010-10-01|location=London|first=Heidi|last=Blake}}</ref>
For example, when a character takes photographs
with an [[instant camera]], inside of the camera
box, a bird carves the picture on a stone tablet
with its beak. In a running gag, the animal
powering such technology would frequently [[Fourth
wall|break the fourth wall]], look directly into
the camera at the audience and offer a mild
complaint about his job. Other commonly seen
gadgets in the series include a baby woolly
mammoth used as a vacuum cleaner; an adult woolly
mammoth acting as a shower by spraying water with
its trunk; elevators raised and lowered by ropes
around brontosauruses' necks; "automatic" windows
powered by monkeys on the outside; birds acting as
"car horns," sounded by the driver pulling on
their tails or squeezing their bodies; an
"electric" [[razor]] made from a clam shell,
vibrating from a honey-bee inside; a pelican as a
[[washing machine]], shown with a beakful of soapy
water; and a woodpecker whose beak is used to play
a gramophone record.  In most cases, "The Man of a
Thousand Voices," [[Mel Blanc]], contributed the
animals' gag lines, often lowering his voice one
to two full octaves, far below the range he used
to voice the character of [[Barney Rubble]].  In
the case of the Flintstones' [[cuckoo clock]]s,
which varied from mechanical toys to live birds
announcing the time, when the hour approached
12:00, the bird inside the clock "cuckooing"
usually just ran out of steam and gave up vocally,
physically, or both.

==="Stone-age" names=== The Stone Age setting
allowed for gags and [[word play]]s involving
rocks and minerals. For example, [[San Antonio]]
becomes "Sand-and-Stony-o"; the country to the
south of Bedrock's land is called "Mexirock"
(Mexico). Travel to "Hollyrock," a parody of
Hollywood, usually involves an "airplane" flight —
the "plane," in this case, is often shown as a
giant [[pterosaur]], with the fuselage strapped to
its back. The last names "Flintstone" and
"Rubble", as well as other common Bedrock surnames
such as "[[Shale]]" and "[[Quartz]]", are in line
with these puns, as are the names of Bedrock's
celebrities: "Gary Granite" ([[Cary Grant]]),
"Stony Curtis" ([[Tony Curtis]]), "Ed
Sulleyrock/Sulleystone" ([[Ed Sullivan]]), "Rock
Pile/Quarry/Hudstone" ([[Rock Hudson]]),
"Ann-Margrock" ([[Ann-Margret]]), "Jimmy Darrock"
([[James Darren]]), "Alvin Brickrock" ([[Alfred
Hitchcock]]), "Perry Masonry/Masonite" ([[Perry
Mason]] as played by [[Raymond Burr]]), "Mick
Jadestone and The Rolling Boulders"  ([[The
Rolling Stones|Mick Jagger and The Rolling
Stones]]), "Eppy Brianstone" ([[Brian Epstein]])
and "The Beau Brummelstones" ([[The Beau
Brummels]]). Once, while visiting one of Bedrock's
houses of "[[Haute Couture]]" with Wilma, Betty
even commented on the new "Jackie Kennerock
([[Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis|Jackie Kennedy]])
look".  In some cases, the celebrity featured also
provided the voice: "Samantha" and "Darrin" from
''[[Bewitched]]'' were voiced by [[Elizabeth
Montgomery]] and [[Dick York]]. Examples from the
above list include Ann-Margret, Curtis, Darren,
and the Beau Brummels. Other celebrities, such as
"Ed Sulleystone" and "Alvin Brickrock," were
rendered by impersonators.  Some of Bedrock's
sports heroes include:  football player "Red
Granite" ([[Red Grange]]), wrestler "Bronto
Crushrock" ([[Bronko Nagurski]]), golfer "Arnold
Palmrock" ([[Arnold Palmer]]), boxers "Floyd
Patterstone" ([[Floyd Patterson]]) and "Sonny
Listone" ([[Sonny Liston]]), and baseball players
"Sandy Stoneaxe" ([[Sandy Koufax]]), "Lindy
McShale" ([[Lindy McDaniel]]), "Roger Marble"
([[Roger Maris]]) and "Mickey Marble" or "Mickey
Mantlepiece" ([[Mickey Mantle]]). Ace reporter
"Daisy Kilgranite" ([[Dorothy Kilgallen]]) was a
friend of Wilma. Monster names include "Count
Rockula" ([[Count Dracula]]) and "The Frankenstone
Monster" ([[Frankenstein's monster]]).

==Characters== ===The Flintstones=== {|
class="wikitable sortable" align="left center"
style="width:75%;" |- !
style="background:#e3e3e3; width:20%;"|Character !
style="background:#e3e3e3; width:50%;"|Role |-
|[[Fred Flintstone]] |The main character. fred is
an accident-prone quarry worker and head of the
Flintstone clan. He is quick to anger (usually
over trivial matters), but is a very loving
husband and father.  |- |[[Wilma Flintstone]]
|Fred's wife. She is more intelligent and
level-headed than her husband, though she often
has a habit of spending money (with her and
Betty's catchphrase being "Da-da-da duh da-da
CHARGE IT!!").  |- |[[Pebbles Flintstone]] |The
Flintstones' infant daughter, who is born near the
end of the third season.  |- |[[Dino (The
Flintstones)|Dino]] |The Flintstones' pet
dinosaur, who barks and generally acts like a dog.
A running gag in the series involves Dino knocking
down Fred out of excitement and licking him
repeatedly.  |- |[[Baby Puss (The
Flintstones)|Baby Puss]] |The Flintstones' pet
[[saber-toothed cat]], who is rarely
seen{{when|date=April 2012}} in the actual series,
but is always seen throwing fred out of the house
during the end credits, causing Fred to pound
repeatedly on the front door and yell "Wilma!"  He
is seen briefly in the episode, "The X-Ray Story."
Sick from a "dino-peptic germ," Dino refuses to
eat his food ("Schlump").  Wilma threatens Dino,
saying, "If you don't eat, I'll feed it to the
cat."  Wherupon Baby Puss leaps out the window in
terror.  |}

===The Rubbles=== {| class="wikitable sortable"
align="left center" style="width:75%;" |- !
style="background:#e3e3e3; width:20%;"|Character !
style="background:#e3e3e3; width:50%;"|Role |-
|[[Barney Rubble]] |The secondary main character
and fred's best friend and next door neighbor. He
and Fred are both members of the fictional "Loyal
Order of Water Buffaloes" (Lodge No. 26), a
men-only club paralleling real-life fraternities
such as the [[Moose International|Loyal Order of
Moose]].  |- |[[Betty Rubble]] |Barney's wife and
best friend of Wilma.  |- |[[Bamm-Bamm Rubble]]
|The Rubbles' abnormally strong adopted son; his
name comes from the only phrase he ever spoke as a
baby: "Bamm, Bamm!" |- |[[Hoppy (The
Flintstones)|Hoppy]] | The Rubbles' pet Hopparoo
(a kangaroo/dinosaur combination creature).  |}

===Other characters=== {| class="wikitable
sortable" align="left center" style="width:75%;"
|- !  style="background:#e3e3e3;
width:20%;"|Character !
style="background:#e3e3e3; width:50%;"|Role |-
|Arnold |The Flintstones' paper boy. A running gag
is Fred being outsmarted by Arnold.  |- |Joe
Rockhead |A friend of Fred and Barney. Usually,
when Fred and Barney have some kind of falling
out, Fred mentions doing something (such as going
to a baseball game) with Joe.  |- |Mr. Slate
|Fred's hot tempered boss at the [[stone quarry]].
|- |[[Pearl Slaghoople]] |Wilma's hard-to-please
mother, who is constantly disapproving of Fred and
his behavior.  |- |[[The Great Gazoo]] |An
[[Extraterrestrial life|alien]] exiled to Earth
who helps Fred and Barney, often against their
will. He is actually from the future, and is quite
dismayed when he realizes he has been sent back to
"the Stone Age." |- |Over 100 other
characters.<ref>Romanek, Broc.
[http://www.thecorporatecounsel.net/nonmember/Flintstones/
"List of Flintstones Characters"].
Thecorporatecounsel.net, accessed 31 March
2011</ref> |These include Gary Granite,
Ann–Margrock, Perry Masonry, etc.  |}

==Voice actors== {{Refimprove section|date=July
2009}} It has been noted Fred Flintstone
physically resembled voice actor [[Alan Reed]],
and also [[Jackie Gleason]], whose series ''[[The
Honeymooners]]'' was said to be very similar to
''The Flintstones''. The voice of Barney Rubble
was provided by voice actor [[Mel Blanc]], though
five episodes during the second season (the 1st,
2nd, 5th, 6th, and 9th) employed Hanna-Barbera
regular [[Daws Butler]] while Blanc was
incapacitated by a near-fatal car accident. Blanc
was able to return to the series much sooner than
expected, by virtue of a temporary recording
studio for the entire cast set up at Blanc's
bedside. It should be noted, however, Blanc's
portrayal of Barney had changed considerably after
the accident. In the earliest episodes, Blanc had
used a much higher pitch. After his recovery from
the accident, Blanc used a deeper voice, quite
similar to the voice of the Abominable Snowman he
performed in other cartoons.

Additional similarities with ''The Honeymooners''
included the fact that Reed based Fred's voice
upon [[Jackie Gleason]]'s interpretation of
[[Ralph Kramden]], while Blanc, after a season of
using a nasal, high-pitched voice for Barney,
eventually adopted a style of voice similar to
that used by [[Art Carney]] in his portrayal of Ed
Norton. The first time the Art Carney-like voice
was used was for a few seconds in "The Prowler"
(the third episode produced).

In a 1986 ''[[Playboy]]'' interview, Jackie
Gleason said Alan Reed had done voice-overs for
Gleason in his early movies, and he (Gleason)
considered suing Hanna-Barbera for copying ''The
Honeymooners'' but decided to let it pass.<ref
name="zehme-playboy">{{cite
web|url=http://www.playboy.com/articles/jackie-gleason-1986-interview/index.html?page=2|title=Jackie
Gleason – Playboy Interview – Life
History|last=Zehme|first=Bill
(interviewer)|date=August
1986|accessdate=2009-07-25}}</ref> According to
[[Henry Corden]], who took over as the voice of
Fred Flintstone after Alan Reed died, and was a
friend of Gleason, “Jackie’s lawyers told him he
could probably have ''The Flintstones'' pulled
right off the air. But they also told him, “Do you
want to be known as the guy who yanked Fred
Flintstone off the air? The guy who took away a
show so many kids love, and so many parents love,
too?”<ref>Brooks, Marla. 2005.
[http://books.google.com/books?id=hyTuAAAAMAAJ&q=%22Do+you+want+to+be+known+as+the+guy+who+yanked+Fred+Flintstone+off+the+air%22&dq=%22Do+you+want+to+be+known+as+the+guy+who+yanked+Fred+Flintstone+off+the+air%22&hl=en&ei=kQrgToq7CJDWiAKFx-mNDw&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CDEQ6AEwAA
The American family on television: a chronology of
121 shows, 1948-2004, p. 54.]</ref>

[[Henry Corden]] took over the voice
responsibilities of Fred after Reed's death in
1977 with ''[[A Flintstone
Christmas]]''.<ref>"[http://www.bcdb.com/cartoon/28593-Flintstone_Christmas.html
A Flintstone Christmas]". ''www.bcdb.com'',  April
12, 2012</ref> Corden had previously provided
Fred's singing voice in ''[[The Man Called
Flintstone]]''<ref>"[http://www.bcdb.com/cartoon/3252-Man_Called_Flintstone.html
The Man Called Flintstone]". ''www.bcdb.com'',
April 12, 2012</ref> and later on Flintstones
children's records. Since 2000, [[Jeff Bergman]],
[[James Arnold Taylor]], and [[Scott Innes]]
(performing Fred and Barney for [[Toshiba]]
Commercials) have performed the voice of Fred.
Since Mel Blanc's death in 1989, Barney has been
voiced by both [[Frank Welker]] and [[Kevin
Michael Richardson]]. Various additional character
voices were created by [[Hal Smith (actor)|Hal
Smith]], [[Allan Melvin]], [[Janet Waldo]], [[Daws
Butler]], and [[Howard Morris]], among others.

===Voice cast===
* [[Fred Flintstone]] – [[Alan Reed]]; [[Henry
* Corden]] (singing voice in ''[[The Man Called
* Flintstone]]'' only) [[Wilma
* Flintstone]]/[[Pebbles Flintstone]] – [[Jean
* Vander Pyl]] [[Barney Rubble]] – [[Mel Blanc]];
* [[Daws Butler]] (season 2; episodes 1, 2, 5, 6,
* and 9 only) [[Betty Rubble]] – [[Bea Benaderet]]
* (seasons 1–4); [[Gerry Johnson]] (seasons 5–6)
* [[Bamm-Bamm Rubble]]/Hoppy/Arnold – [[Don
* Messick]] [[Dino (The Flintstones)|Dino
wilma and fred got dinner one time.
then fred and wilma totally did it.
